Add new default reference types page (#506)
ponylang/pony-tutorial: docs/reference-capabilities/default-capabilities.md

# Default Reference Types

We've mentioned throughout this tutorial what the default reference capabilities are for types and classes. However, there's a good chance those defaults passed over your head while you were focused on understanding capabilities themselves.

> First, there is nothing saying you have to use default capabilities. Especially as you start writing your first Pony programs, you'll probably find it very educational to explicitly specify the capabilities for all your classes, actors, functions, parameters and fields. However, it's not _writing_ code that makes default capabilities confusing; it's _reading_ that code. Hopefully keeping this summary open will help you navigate pony source code until you've become used to the defaults!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, there is nothing saying you have to use default capabilities. Especially as you start writing your first Pony programs, you'll might find it educational to explicitly specify the capabilities for all your classes, actors, functions, parameters and fields. However, it's not _writing_ code that makes default capabilities confusing; it's _reading_ that code. Hopefully keeping this summary open will help you navigate pony source code until you've become used to the defaults!
```

> First, there is nothing saying you have to use default capabilities. Especially as you start writing your first Pony programs, you'll probably find it very educational to explicitly specify the capabilities for all your classes, actors, functions, parameters and fields. However, it's not _writing_ code that makes default capabilities confusing; it's _reading_ that code. Hopefully keeping this summary open will help you navigate pony source code until you've become used to the defaults!

Reviewer: I don't like the assumption of difficulty here. Much as we shouldn't assume things are easy for people, this assumes hard for people. I'd like to this rewritten to be to not make assumption about if the reader is finding the topic easy or hard but rather address that if they are finding it hard, don't worry, they aren't alone in that. Some people catch on with reference capabilities easily, others struggle with different parts.

Author: I was parrotting the vibes from the intro to https://tutorial.ponylang.io/reference-capabilities/capability-matrix.html here. Now that you mention it, I actually find reference capabilities relatively intuitive, and this document was my only confusion. I'll tone it down.

> First, there is nothing saying you have to use default capabilities. Especially as you start writing your first Pony programs, you'll probably find it very educational to explicitly specify the capabilities for all your classes, actors, functions, parameters and fields. However, it's not _writing_ code that makes default capabilities confusing; it's _reading_ that code. Hopefully keeping this summary open will help you navigate pony source code until you've become used to the defaults!

Reviewer: This says "First," but there's no "Second". Were you intending to add another point? If not, I'd like to remove the "First," but I'm not sure if in the process of writing if you had some additional points you were thinking of making and then didn't while working out other parts.

Author: I meant it more as "Before we begin", but if I phrase it that way the whole paragraph falls apart. I'll stitch it together differently when I push changes.

> First, there is nothing saying you have to use default capabilities. Especially as you start writing your first Pony programs, you'll probably find it very educational to explicitly specify the capabilities for all your classes, actors, functions, parameters and fields. However, it's not _writing_ code that makes default capabilities confusing; it's _reading_ that code. Hopefully keeping this summary open will help you navigate pony source code until you've become used to the defaults!

Author: I think my new intro solves this.

> ## Reference type summary

Reviewer: So I think it should be assumed that someone arrives on this page from a search and additional information should be here as well. Before diving into a table, I think there should be a recapping of what a "default capability" is. Something like showing...

```pony
fun foo(): String iso^ =>
  "hello world".clone()
```

and then show the

```pony
fun box foo(): String iso^ =>
  "hello world".clone()
```

Reviewer 2: What about removing the clone and returning `String val` so that you can show the default capability for String?

Reviewer: Ah so `String` as the return type in the first and `String val` in the second?

Reviewer 2: Exactly, two birds with one stone that way

Author: I created one with a class as well to get even more birds.

We go into detail of the default types below, but here's a table summarizing them:

> | Item                    | Default Capability | Explanation                                                             |

Reviewer: I find numerous things in this table confusing. I understand it is trying to be expansive but I think it ends up being rather confusing in some places, like listing defaults for things and then saying "well but only this other type can have different capabilities".

I think a distinction needs to be made between "default" as in "you can override" and "this is what it is" and only discuss the former and not mix in the latter in the same section.

Author: That’s been tripping me up all along. Perhaps two separate tables.

Author: I split it into two tables, but I still don't love it. I don't have any specific ideas, so I'll leave this as an open question.

| ----------------------- | ------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | primitive               | `val`              | Primitives are immutable and can never be anything but `val`            |

Reviewer 2: While primitives are immutable, reference capabilities apply to references. One could in theory have a `P tag` reference to some primitive `P`.

Perhaps: are always constructed as `val`

Author: Changed it as this and added a note about `tag` to the text below.

> | actor                   | `tag`              | Actors can neither be read nor written and are always `tag`             |

Reviewer 2: Again, each actor has a `ref` reference to itself. Perhaps: Actors are always seen by other actors as `tag`.

Reviewer: I think a lot of these explanations while well intended can be misleading and this table overall would be better without the explanations. I'd like to see an attempt made to make the overall content of this page work without the explanation field of the table that I think is ambiguous in places and potentially misleading.

Author: I'm leaving the explanations in place for now, but as placeholders. I'm not sure if they can be salvaged or not, but there isn't a lot of sense in updating them until the content is correct.

Author: Note: I changed my mind on the editing pass and removed the Explanation column.

| class                   | `ref`              | Instances of classes default to ref type if unspecified                 |
| fields                  | default for type   | Whatever was specified on the _target_ class                            |
| variables               | default for type   | Whatever was specified on the _target_ class                            |
| parameter               | default for type   | Whatever was specified on the _target_ class                            |
| constructor (primitive) | `val`              | Only classes can have different constructor capabilities                |
| constructor (actor)     | `tag`              | Only classes can have different constructor capabilities                |

> | constructor (class)     | `ref`              | Only classes can have different constructor capabilities                |

Author: I'm leaving this open as part of the "the table explanations column needs work" discussion.

> | receiver (function)     | `box`              | Functions cannot mutate class state by default (use `func ref`)         |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| receiver (function)     | `box`              | Functions cannot mutate class state by default (use `fun ref`)         |
```

| receiver (behaviour)    | `ref`              | Actors can mutate their state from inside a behaviour                   |
| recover (immutable)     | `val`              | An immutable value (box or val) is recovered to `val` by default        |

> | recover (mutable)       | `iso`              | An immutable value (box or val) is recovered to `val` by default        |

Reviewer 2: Typo here?

Author: `yyp` fail. 😳

| literal (object)        | `ref`              | object literals default to same capabilities as their non-literal types |
| literal (actor)         | `tag`              | object literals default to same capabilities as their non-literal types |
| literal (primitive)     | `val`              | object literals default to same capabilities as their non-literal types |

> | lambda (no captures)    | `val`              | lambda capabilities depend on whether they capture their environment    |

Reviewer 2: no *possibly mutable* captures

| lambda (captures)       | `ref`              | lambda capabilities depend on whether they capture their environment    |

## Primitive default capabilities

> Let's start with primitives because they're easy. All primitives have `val` capabilities. They are immutable, they are read only, there is only one of each primitive, and they are accessible from all actors. So `val`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Let's start with primitives because they're stateless. All primitives have `val` capabilities. Primitives are immutable, they are read-only, there is only one of each primitive, and it is accessible from all actors -- read-only and shareable means the default is `val`.
```

I try to resist calling anything "easy" or even "simple" as it can have the effect of subtly stating "if you don't understand this, then you cannot understand it at all" which is not true and especially bad in a tutorial setting where whether the reader understands it is on us as the writers.

Reviewer: +1 to avoiding easy and simple. Simple does have a definition that is useful in technical writing, sadly that meaning is rarely understood so I try to avoid "simple" like I avoid "easy".

> In fact, defining a primitive as `primitive val MyPrimitive` is a syntax error. Primitives are so `val` that you can't even tell them they are `val`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In fact, defining a primitive as `primitive val MyPrimitive` is a syntax error.
```

I like the second sentence as it brings in some personality to the Tutorial, but nonetheless I think it is not needed.

## Actor default capabilities

> Similar to primitives, actors always have a `tag` default capability. Like primitives, it is not possible to specify a different default capability for tags.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Actors always have a default `tag` capability. Like primitives, attempting to override the default reference capability is a syntax error.
```

```pony
actor Actor
```

has `tag` capabilities

```pony
actor ref Actor
```

> is illegal

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
is illegal. This is because a actor `ref` would not be concurrency safe -- it would allow directly reading an actor's internal state as opposed to requiring message passing to share state.
```

## Class default capabilities

By default, a class has `ref` capability. Therefore, these two class definitions are equivalent:

```pony
class ref RefClass
    ...

class RefClass
    ...
```

> But whether specified by default or explicitly as `class ref` (or `class val` or any other capability) what does it actually mean? A class or actor's default capability only applies when you _define_ a field or local type. This can happen either as `let` or `var`, or when specifying a parameter on a function or behaviour.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
But whether specified by default or explicitly as `class ref` (or `class val` or any other capability) what does it actually mean? A class or actor's default capability only applies when you _define_ a field or local type. This can happen when using `let` or `var`, or when specifying a parameter on a function or behaviour.
```

Reviewer 4: The "either" made me think it referred to the "or" between let and var, rather than the continuation after the comma.

> ## Field, Variable, and Parameter capabilities

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Field, variable, and parameter capabilities
```

> For example, `String` is defined in the standard library as `class val String`. So it's default capability is the immutable shareable `val` capability. That means that all the `String`s in the following actor definition could be replaced with `String val`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For example, `String` is defined in the standard library as `class val String`. So its default capability is the immutable, shareable `val` capability. That means that all the `String`s in the following actor definition could be replaced with `String val`:
```

```pony

> actor UsesStrings

Reviewer: indentation should be two spaces not four.

    let s1: String
    var s2: String

    new create(s1': String, s2': String) =>
        s1 = s1'
        s2 = s2'

    be do_thing(s3: String) =>
        None

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ```pony
> actor UsesStrings
>     let s1: String
>     var s2: String
> 
>     new create(s1': String, s2': String) =>
>         s1 = s1'
>         s2 = s2'
> 
>     be do_thing(s3: String) =>
>         None
> 
> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```pony
actor UsesStrings
    let s1: String
    var s2: String

    new create(s1': String, s2': String) =>
        s1 = s1'
        s2 = s2'

    be do_thing(s3: String) =>
        None
```
```

Author: I think github made this suggestion weird and it was supposed to just be deleting the extra newline. If I missed another change in it, let me know.

However `StringBytes` is defined as `class ref`, so all the `StringBytes`' in the following class definition are equivalent to `StringBytes ref`:

```pony
class UsesStringBytes
    let s1: StringBytes
    var s2: StringBytes

    new create(s1': StringBytes, s2': StringBytes) =>
        s1 = s1'
        s2 = s2'

    fun do_thing(s3: StringBytes) =>
        None
```

> Notably, however, the default capability on a class **does not** influence the constructors for that class.

Reviewer 4: What do you mean here?

Reviewer 4: Do you mean the ability to override the default on a given constructor?

Reviewer: So I think there's a misunderstanding here on what a "default capability on a class" is.

It's not a "default on the class" it is the default capability for the type if the type appears elsewhere in the source without a capability.

So...

`class val String` means that if I say: `let x: String` it means `let x: String val`.

Which has nothing to do with the capability of the instance created when calling a given constructor.

Author: Yeah, that was the confusion I was trying to resolve here. I originally expected there to be some correlation between the return type on the constructor and spent quite a bit of trial and error before it clicked that the constructor return type has nothing to do with the default on the class. It's one of those things that is too obvious to an experienced Pony developer and a new user needs to be told only once. Possibly it should go at the point class default reference capabilities are first introduced instead of here.

Author: Looking at this again, I realized that the chief purpose of this sentence was actually as a transition to the next section. I massaged it a bit, but it might still be a bit stiff.

## Constructor capabilities

> Let's start with the easy defaults first: A primitive constructor _always_ returns an object with `val` capabilities, and an actor constructor _always_ returns an object with `tag` capabilities. In fact, it is forbidden to put a capability after `new` when defining a primitive or actor.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Let's start with the required defaults first: a primitive constructor _always_ returns an object with `val` capabilities, and an actor constructor _always_ returns an object with `tag` capabilities. In fact, it is forbidden to put a capability after `new` when defining a primitive or actor.
```

Not sure "required" is the right word, but I mean to remove the "easy" while implying their requirement for primitive and actor to be their specified defaults.

> Classes are a little more flexible. The capability returned by a `new` constructor default to a `ref` if you are constructing a `class`. This is true regardless of what the default capability for the class is, but you have the option to specify a different capability by explicitly typing the constructor as e.g `new var create` or `new iso create_iso`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Classes are more flexible. The capability returned by a constructor defaults to `ref` if you are constructing a `class`. This is true regardless of what the default capability for the class is, but you have the option to specify a different capability by explicitly typing the constructor (e.g.,  `new iso create_iso`).
```

Consider the following class:

```pony
class val MyClass
    let foo: String

    new create_ref(foo': String) =>
        foo = foo'

    new val create_val(foo': String) =>
        foo = foo'
```

> This class has two constructors. The first one, `create_ref` returns a `MyClass` with `ref` capabilities because `ref` is always default for class constructors. The second one `create_val` explicitly returns a `MyClass` with `val` capabilities.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This class has two constructors. The first one, `create_ref` returns a `MyClass` with `ref` capability because `ref` is always default for class constructors. The second one `create_val` explicitly returns a `MyClass` with `val` capability.
```

"Capabilities" refers to the collection of refcaps in my mind, while "capability" refers to a single one of the refcaps -- is this a consistent thought, or do more people thing of refcaps in terms of their specific denials?

Author: I didn't make a conscious decision about it, and I assume that what you are expecting is consistent with the other documentation. In my mind, a reference capability type may have multiple capabilites in the sense that it may be capable of multiple things (specifically, "read", "write", and "share"). But much more likely that I just wasn't paying attention to the existing docs.

> _Tip_: Instead of using the default `ref` type for constructors, consider using `iso`. Recall that constructors, like `consume` return their values as an ephemeral type. That means that a constructor typed as `new iso` actually returns a `iso^`. And `iso^` has the terrific property of being convertible to any other type! Consider:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
_Tip_: Instead of using the default `ref` capability for constructors, consider using `iso`. Recall that constructors, like `consume` return their values as an ephemeral type. That means that a constructor typed as `new iso` actually returns a `iso^`. And `iso^` has the terrific property of being convertible to any other property! Consider:
```

Reviewer 3: I think the correct term here would be "to any other capability"

Author: Changed to `capability`, but I will leave this comment unresolved. Mainly, I need confirmation that this is a good tip.

```pony
class MyIsoClass
    let foo: String

    new iso create(foo': String) =>
        foo = foo'
```

> This class can be constructed as a ref or val or whatever else:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This class can be constructed as a `ref` or `val` or other capability:
```

```pony
a_ref: MyIsoClass ref = MyIsoClass.create()
a_val: MyIsoClass val = MyIsoClass.create()
```

> In fact, this is what happens if you do not specify a constructor at all. The hidden constructor for this class also returns an `iso^`:

Reviewer: I don't like the term "hidden" here. I don't think calling constructor that wasn't explicitly written by the author as "hidden" is accurate. Nothing was done to hide it. Every object must have a constructor. A default will be provided if the author doesn't supply one.

Author: I didn't like it either, but my brain was stuck. Changed to "auto-generated".

> In fact, this is what happens if you do not specify a constructor at all. The hidden constructor for this class also returns an `iso^`:

Reviewer 4: Not sure I understand this. Can you elaborate?

Author: Does it make sense after I changed 'hidden' to 'auto-generated'?

```pony
class AllDefaults
    var foo: String = "hello"
```

> You can construct instances of this class with a specific capability by specifying the type of the result:

Reviewer 4: Does not including a `new create()` here cause it to be `iso` by default? If so, that is news to me and may be why I was confused just above.

Reviewer: `new create()` is not `new iso create()` it is `new ref create()`.

Author: oops, so it is. I changed this to:

```
let a = AllDefaults // a is ref
let b: AllDefaults iso = AllDefaults // b is iso
let c: AllDefaults val = AllDefaults // c is val
```

However, I'm leaving the discussion open, as I realized the entire constructors section is overlooking the fact that constructors return ephemeral types.

Author: Ok, I'm confused. Consider this code:

```pony
let a = AllDefaults
let a2: AllDefaults val = a
```

This is obviously a compile-time error. And here it is:

```
Error:
/Users/dustyphillips/Desktop/Code/pony-experiments/referee/referee.pony:66:33: right side must be a subtype of left side
        let a2: AllDefaults val = a
                                ^
    Info:
    /Users/dustyphillips/Desktop/Code/pony-experiments/referee/referee.pony:157:1: AllDefaults iso is not a subtype of AllDefaults val^: iso is not a subcap of val^
    class AllDefaults
    ^
    /Users/dustyphillips/Desktop/Code/pony-experiments/referee/referee.pony:157:1: this would be possible if the subcap were more ephemeral. Perhaps you meant to consume a variable here
    class AllDefaults
    ^
```

The reason I thought `a` in this case has `iso` capabilities is that phrase `iso is not a subcap of val^`.

Reviewer: Sorry, what are you confused by?

```pony
let a = AllDefaults // a is iso
let b: AllDefaults ref = AllDefaults // b is ref
let c: AllDefaults val = AllDefaults // c is val
```

Constructors create objects, but what about when you access functions on those objects?

## Default receiver capabilities

> Recall that when you call a function or behaviour, it always implicitly gets a reference to the `this` object.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Recall that when you call a function or behaviour, it always implicitly gets a reference to itself in the form of `this`.
```

The default receiver capability for a function is `box`, as shown in `get_foo` below:

```pony
class MyClass
    var foo: String = ""

    fun get_foo() => foo

    fun ref set_foo(foo': String) => foo = foo'
```

Notably, you can't mutate a `box`, so mutable methods must be defined as `fun ref` or `fun trn`.

> The _only_ behavior capability for an actor is `ref`. You cannot specify a `be val` for example, or even `be ref`. This may be counter-intuitive since the _caller_ only has a tag to the actor, but the actor is totally free to reference its own fields from the behaviour.

Reviewer 4: Is this true? I have never thought to check this so if it is then I just learned something! I cannot think of a reason for it not to be true besides the implementer wanting to create some form of "pass through" behavior which is statically guaranteed not to mutate internal state, but would be allowed to send messages (perhaps will copies of internal state).

Reviewer: No it's not true. I understand the idea trying to be expressed, but it isn't true.

This is a misunderstanding of what is happening with viewpoint adaptation. `be` is not `ref`. If it was, then you couldn't send a message to an actor because all you have is a `tag`.

There's other points of  "kind of right, but not quite right" in the explanations here that I was saving to address later.

Author: ah, yes; I never thought about how defaults are affected by viewpoints. Most of this came from "instantiate a thing and see what the compiler thinks it is if I assign it to something else (as opposed to "I know what's going on" ;-) ). My eyes may have glossed over a `->` somewhere.

Author: I'm not touching this paragraph. I can see that it' wrong, but I think @SeanTAllen will need to set it right.

## Default recover capabilities

If you are recovering a value, it will default to `val` if the value is immutable (`val` or `box`), and `iso` if it is mutable (`ref` or `trn`):

```pony
var i_am_iso = recover MyClass.create_ref("abc") end
var i_am_val = recover MyClass.create_box("def") end
```

> You can, of course, change the capability using `recover ref` or similar.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can still change the capability using `recover ref` or similar.
```

## Default object literal capabilities

> The default capabilities on an object literal depend on whether the object literal specifies a primitive, actor or class, and use the same defaults as the accompanying type:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The default capabilities on an object literal depend on whether the object literal specifies a primitive, actor, or class, and use the same defaults as the accompanying type:
```

Oxford commas rule!

```pony

> let myObject = object

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
let myClass = object
```

Reviewer: I disagree with this change. It's an object, not a class.

However, I also disagree with "object literal specifies a primitive, actor or class". An object literal is an object literal. primitives, actors, and classes are all objects. Saying an object literal specifies one while well meanging isn't correct and that explanation could be problematic in some contexts.

Author: Can we solve this with judicious use of the word "instance"? Is it pedantically correct to say "an object literal with behaviours defined is an instance of an actor type"?

Reviewer: That's misleading. Try turning your thinking around from an object literal to "actor is a keyword that creates an object with certain qualities". Ditto for class and primitive. It's a subtle but i think important distinction.

Reviewer: An object that has behaviors will have a message queue. We often refer to these as "actor" and we have a keyword for creating these objects. 

I don't think your statement is wrong but I do worry that it could be misleading.

Author: I've reworked this a little, but now it feels more accurate, but also clumsy.

    let s: String = "hello"
end
```

> has `ref` capabilities (it is an object of an anonymous class).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
has `ref` capabilities as it is an anonymous class due to having functions, no behaviors, and maintaining internal state.
```

```pony
let myActor = object
    be apply() => None
end
```

> has tag capabilities.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
has `tag` capabilities as it is an anonymous actor due to defining at least one behavior.
```

> ```pony
> let myPrimitive = object
> fun apply() => None
> end
> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```pony
let myPrimitive = object
    fun apply() => None
end
```
```

> has `val` capabilities.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
has `val` capabilities as it is an anonymous primitive due to having functions, no behaviors, and no internal state.
```

Reviewer: This isn't correct. There's no such thing as an anonymous primitive. Is this a primitive?

```pony
class Foo
  fun apply(): U64 =>
    3
```

No, its a class. But it has functions, no behaviors, and no internal state.

## Default lambda capabilities

> Recall that a lambda creates an object literal with an `apply` function. That underlying object has `ref` capabilities if it captures any variables. If it does not capture variables, it defaults to `val` capabilities.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Recall that a lambda creates an object literal with an `apply` function. That underlying object has `ref` capability if it captures any variables. If it does not capture variables, it defaults to `val` capability.
```

```pony
var myLambdaVal = {(s: String): String => "my Lambda" + s}
var myLambdaRef = {(s: String): String => myLambdaVal("here") + s}
```

`myLambdaVal` has `val` capabilities because it doesn't capture anything. `myLambdaRef` defaults to `ref` capabilities because it captures `myLambdaVal`.

> You can specify different capabilities after the lambda:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can specify a different capability after the lambda:
```

```pony
var myOtherLambdaRef = {(): String => "hello"} ref
```

> is a `ref` even though with no captures it would have defaulted to `val` capabilities.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
is a `ref` even though with no captures it would have defaulted to `val` capability.
```
